## Abstract Syntax Tree (AST) for C Programming Language

### Overview of compilation

Broadly speaking, compilation of C programs refers to producing executable
binary files containing machine code from source files. It consists of the
following procedures:

1. Macros in a C file are expanded, and a modified C file (referenced as an
expanded C file later) is generated. This stage is also known as preprocessing.
To be more specific, a preprocessor handles a C source file by recursively
searching header files, expanding macros in found header files, and replacing
macros in the source file with expansion results.

2. A C compiler translate a expanded C file into an assembly file which contains
human-readable machine code and assembly directives. Compilation in the narrow
sense refers to this procedure.

3. An assembler produce an object file from an assembly file. An object file
includes binary machine code but can not executed directly at the this stage.

4. An static linker collects multiple object files and creates an executable
binary file.

The above processes can be well illustrated by the following image (adapted from
*Computer Systems: A Programmerâ€™s Perspective 3nd Edition*).

![Compilation of C Programs](/doc/img/compilation_of_c_program.png)

### Handling C Macros

Different from programming languages that do not support macros (such as Java
and Python) or have macros as part of their language syntax (for example Rust),
C has loose specifications about how macros can be defined and used. Thus, a C
source file may seem to have syntactic errors even ignoring macro definitions.
For example, the following code snippet was extracted from [stdlib/strtol.c](https://github.com/bminor/glibc/blob/bb1d27b94a3614c7e48212a04a0b28ec66fb4c49/stdlib/strtol.c#L104-L111):

```c
INT
INTERNAL (strtol) (const STRING_TYPE *nptr, STRING_TYPE **endptr,
		   int base, int group)
{
  return INTERNAL (__strtol_l) (nptr, endptr, base, group, false,
				_NL_CURRENT_LOCALE);
}
libc_hidden_def (INTERNAL (strtol))
```

According to the section *6.9 External definitions* of the [C11 specification](https://www.open-std.org/jtc1/sc22/wg14/www/docs/n1570.pdf),
the first part of above the code is fundamentally a function definition if
`INTERNAL (strtol)` is considered as a declarator. By contrast,
`libc_hidden_def (INTERNAL (strtol))` is seemingly a syntactic error because the
C language specification requires declarations, which are top-level components
of a translation unit (essentially a C source file), to end with `;`. In fact,
both `libc_hidden_def` and `INTERNAL` are macros, and the whole line will be
expanded to a valid c declaration as:

```c
extern __typeof (__strtol_internal) __EI___strtol_internal __asm__(__hidden_asmname (__strtol_internal));
```

To construct ASTs, there are two approaches to issues related to use of macros.
One is to first preprocess a C file and then to parse it. For example, we can
use the proprocessors of Clang and GCC to expand a C file to a "clean" one.
Later, we could utilze third-party libraries, such as [Python binding of
libclang](https://pypi.org/project/clang/) or Rust crate [lang\_c][rust crate lang c],
to build ASTs from it. Nevertheless, it may be significantly inconvenient to
require a file to be preprocessed for two reasons. First, for a realistic C
project, preprocessing typically requires both system and user-defined header
files. In order to obtain accurate preprocessing results, users have to specify
search paths for header files either manually or by providing [a compilation
database](https://clang.llvm.org/docs/JSONCompilationDatabase.html) which
records how a C compiler compiles every file. For the latter manner, a database
is generated only after a successful compilation of the whole project. Moreover,
preprocessing can only be done on a system that has header files of relied
third-party libraries. Therefore, it may fail to build ASTs in a clean system
because the required header files are missing. In summary, it is somehow
heavy-weight to do both preprocessing and AST construction even though C has a
relatively small set of language syntax.

The second approach is to model common macro uses as an extended C syntax
without requiring preprocessing. For example, we could parse
`libc_hidden_def (INTERNAL (strtol))` as a declaration (or a less common
function definition) since a top-level element of a C file is either a function
definition or a declaration. Obviously, this approach has several downsides. As
C macros can be defined and used in an extremelly flexible manner, the set of
extended C syntax could be infinitely large. It is impossible to anticipate all
the ways C developers use macros and construct an AST for each use. Therefore,
it may fail to parse a C file to ASTs if the file is not yet preprocessed and an
unexpected macro use is encountered. Nonetheless, this approach enables parsing
a C file independently, without relying on other header files or preprocessing.

To conclude, preprocessing-free ASTs construction provides a good starting
point for static analysis of realistic software projects. As a superset of
standard C syntax, the extended C syntax should work with C files that have been
preprocessed. Thus, preprocessing can be integrated in the workflow of static
code analysis to obtain semantically legitimate C structures, which could be
further transformed into low-level representations for data-flow and
control-flow analysis.

### Implementation based on tree-sitter

[Tree-sitter](https://github.com/tree-sitter/tree-sitter) is an incremental
parsing system for programming tools. It offers Python bindings for many
supported languages and supports C programming langauge. Hence, we utilize
tree-sitter and [tree-sitter-c](https://github.com/tree-sitter/tree-sitter-c) to
construct abstract syntax tree for C. Instead of directly using tree
presentations provided by tree-sitter, we create our own AST for two reasons.
First, tree-sitter syntax trees are essentially [concreate syntax trees](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Parse_tree)
(CSTs, also known as parse trees), which keep comments, punctuator tokens, new
lines, and etc. While it could be ideal for online code editing to keep these
syntax component, it may be annoyingly demanding to analyze CSTs. Secondly,
while manipulated programmingly, every tree node of a tree-sitter tree is of the
same type and too vaguely plain to do analysis on as tree-sitter has support for
a very large base of programming langauges. Therefore, a more specifized and
concise tree representation is necessary. Our design of abstract syntax tree for
C is primarily inspired by tree-sitter-c and adopt some syntax structure of
[lang\_c][rust crate lang c] to better reflect C standard syntax.

As mentioned previously, although tree-sitter-c already handle several macro
uses via extended syntax, it is still possible to see syntax errors reported by
tree-sitter as unknown irregular macro uses could potentially exist. We provide
an extendable mechanism for handling unrecognized syntax via a plugin system. If
a syntax error is detected, registered plugins are searched for a code fixing
solution. Some key interfaces for the plugin system are as follows:

```python
@dataclass(frozen=True)
class CodeFix:
    byte_start: int  # inclusive
    byte_end: int  # exclusive
    replacement: bytes


class ParsingFixerInterface(metaclass=ABCMeta):
    @abstractmethod
    def node_type(self) -> str:
        pass

    @abstractmethod
    def can_fix(self, tree: Tree, curosr: TreeCursor) -> bool:
        pass

    @abstractmethod
    def fix(self, tree: Tree, cursor: TreeCursor) -> CodeFix:
        pass


class ParsingFixerRegistry:
    _registry: Dict[str, List[ParsingFixerInterface]] = defaultdict(list)

    @classmethod
    def register(cls, fixer: ParsingFixerInterface) -> bool:
        node_type = fixer.node_type()
        fixer_list = cls._registry[node_type]

        if fixer in fixer_list:
            return False
        else:
            fixer_list.append(fixer)
            return True

    @classmethod
    def lookup_fixer(
        cls,
        tree: Tree,
        cursor: TreeCursor,
    ) -> Optional[ParsingFixerInterface]:
        if cursor.node is None:
            return None

        node_type = cursor.node.type
        for fixer in cls._registry[node_type]:
            if fixer.can_fix(tree, cursor):
                return fixer

        return None
```

Following is a flowchart representing the AST parsing process:

![Flowchart of AST Parsing](/doc/img/ast_parsing_flowchart.png)

#### Known limitations

Currently, parsing will fail for the following C language features:

1. Inline assembly statements.

2. Type aliasing using `typedef` keyword.

3. Type qualifiers exclusive to MSVC, including but not limited to `__cdecl`,
`__clrcall`, `__stdcall`, `__fastcall`, `__thiscall`, `__vectorcall`,
`__declspec`, `__based`.

4. C11 generic selection expressions.

5. C11 static assertion.

[rust crate lang c]: https://docs.rs/lang-c/latest/lang_c/
